Returning out of the Middle East,
CNN analyst and Axios
reporter Barak Ravid
is now reporting that Iran has indeed
decided to directly attack Israel.
And though it's not clear
when that might happen
or what form it would take,
the attack
could come reports
as soon as in the next few days.
With us now,
CNN military analyst
retired Lieutenant General Mark
hurdling and former State
Department Middle East negotiator
Aaron David Miller.
General, starting with you.
What do you expect
from Iran
as compared to the drone
and multi missile attacks?
Some 300 rockets and missiles
that were directed towards
Israel back in April
from Iran, directly
from Iranian territory.
Do you expect something
similar or something different?
You know, Wolf,
you can't really say
it could be a spectrum along that line,
anything from a massive attack
not only from Iran,
but also in coordination with Hezbollah
and with other forces in the area.
The PMF forces in Syria and Iraq,
as well as the Houthis in Yemen.
Or could
we see just a kinetic strike
that's precision
and surgical
in nature
to show Israel and for Iran
to show their own population
that they are doing something
about what's struck in Tehran.
So it could be anywhere
between those two extremes.
but I think they have to do something
just to appease their own population,
but also to show Israel
that they are ready to confront them.
But anything that they do do.
could certainly expand
this region into a,
catastrophic conflict.
And that's
certainly what Israeli military officials
are bracing for.
Right now,
as I can tell you, based on briefings
that I've had over the past few days.
Aaron, there's been some confusion.
Today's, you know, over
how Hamas is treating Thursday,
a scheduled cease fire,
hostage release talks.
What's your read on the statement
they put out earlier today?
You know, the worst thing in negotiation,
Wolf, is to
tell your negotiating partners
that you're in a hurry.
And I suspect part of Hamas's calculation
is they know
that Biden's clock, Netanyahu's clock,
and their own clock
are not really in sync.
The administration
wants this done yesterday,
and they're evidencing,
all sorts of signs,
which are completely understandable,
given how fraught
the situation is for the hostages
and the prospects
of an, escalation in the northern front,
they know if they could get a cease
fire would also come down the north.
the problem is that
the Biden clock is not sync.
It seems to me
either with the Netanyahu clock
or the similar clock,
and Yankees
and wire ensconced in some tunnel
somewhere, is making decisions
based on what he considers to be Hamas's
needs and requirements.
And those require, a cessation,
a true cessation of military activity
by the Israelis and Benjamin Netanyahu,
for his own understandable reasons,
are not prepared to agree.
So, I think on this one, Wolf,
that Hamas
ultimately will show
we'll show for Thursday's meeting
if the whole thing is not undermined
by a major
Hezbollah or Iranian strike
sometime in the next 72 hours,
which is certainly possible.
General Hertling,
is there a scenario
you can foresee where Iran launches its
retaliatory attack
against Israel in the coming days,
and the region
still manages
to avert a much wider regional war?
What needs to happen for that
to be how this goes?
Yeah, certainly, Wolf,
there is that potential and it would be
dependent on Iran holding their fire,
literally not
conducting the kind of large scale attack
they held last time
where a lot of Israeli
citizens could be hurt or killed
if that happens.
What I'd say
is, Katie, bar the door
if if Israel is struck to the point
where there are multiple casualties
or a lot of deaths,
I think we're going to see that conflict
spin out of control.
That's the part where I'm very concerned
because it has to do with
not only what Iranians,
Iran's action will be,
but as
Aaron David just said,
also what Hezbollah and Hamas will do,
to, to to contribute to this,
but it could certainly rise
into a regional conflict
or beyond, in my view.
And I don't think Iran is ready for that.
Or has the military
or the diplomat capability
to do something of that scale.
So they should be very
careful in what they do next.
Yeah.
I think you make a very
important point, general,
because based on the briefings
I've been having here,
if Iran were to do
a direct assault on Israel
and wind up
killing a lot of Israeli civilians,
especially destroying a lot of buildings
in Tel Aviv,
where I am right now
attacking military bases,
Ben-Gurion airport,
the international airport
outside of Tel Aviv,
Israel, would respond
with enormous,
enormous military force
against Iran,
something the Israelis believe
the Iranians would
deliberately, desperately try to avoid.
But they won't be able to do so.
So we'll see if this explodes
into that type of regional war.
Aaron, this forthcoming attack
from Iran, as is now
expected against Israel,
is in response
to the killing of a top Hamas leader
who was in Tehran.
Obviously, there's more to come here,
but how has that already impacted
the region altogether?
You know, I think it has in several ways.
Yeah, it's in wire.
Wolf is now
has now been elevated to the air from us,
which is something
frankly, we all knew from the beginning
that he's the major decision maker.
I will say, though, that Mark
generally raises
a critically important point,
and that is the Hezbollah piece of this.
You know,
it takes 12 minutes
for a cruise missile,
to impact in Israel,
assuming it's not intercepted
once from Iran.
We're talking a minute and a half.
Well,
probably less time
for Hezbollah's high
trajectory weapons
and its precision guided munitions
to strike Israel proper.
The real damage here, frankly,
it is not going to come from Iran.
It's going to come from Hizbollah.
But I really do believe that both.
And again, Hurley's right.
I don't think Hezbollah
nor Tehran is interested
in the kind of strike that would trigger,
a massive Israeli response, a response,
I might add, Wolf.
And the Iranians know this
that could easily,
draw in the United States.
The question is, what will be
the fine line
between doing something
that is significant
but not triggering the
regional escalation?
That would create something
the Middle East Wolf
has never seen before,
a genuine
multi-front
war involving Lebanon, Syria, Iraq.
Yemen, Israel, and perhaps,
even an Israeli
and US military involvement,
against Iran.
Yeah, it's a really,
really dangerous situation right now.
General Hurley, before
I let you go,
I want to close with a quick question
on Ukraine right now,
which is seeing
some serious, deterioration as well.
the Ukrainian government claims
that Russian troops
set fire
near the Zaporizhzhia
nuclear plant in, in in Ukraine.
What's your read on on that situation?
How dangerous is it unfolding right now?
Yeah, I've been watching the,
Ukrainian front
for the last seven days
and have been amazed.
Wolf,
this, fire that's
occurring at the Zaporizhzhia
power plant,
I believe, in all intelligence,
at least all open
source retaliations is saying
that it's the result of
a tire fire in inside or near
the, the, the smokestack or the
the the stack of the
the nuclear power plant.
That is to distract.
And it's a Russian way
of doing distraction.
Remember,
Russia has control of that power plant.
They have forces in the area.
There are IAEA, members
there as well saying what's happening?
They say all radiation is safe still,
but they are very concerned.
They've been saying that for months.
But the fact that Russia would,
would, start a tire fire to envelop
smoke into the area
and indicate that something's going on.
It's just another approach by Mr.
Putin to, conflict.
What's going on in this area
and cause more danger,
to not only Ukraine,
but also the entire region.
Let me follow up a general.
what do you make of
the Ukrainian incursion into Russia?
We're now told some 20 miles.
Ukrainian forces
have moved inside Russia.
Yeah, it's been fascinating for me.
Well, first I thought this was a raid.
They have conducted
these kind of cross-border raids
with small forces in the past.
It now appears
to be more of a demonstration.
I certainly wouldn't
call it an offensive yet.
the key is going to be,
can they sustain this fight?
When you put that many forces
and there's apparently
two brigades or more of Ukrainian forces
have gone across the border,
not just of of, Kurz,
but also in Belgrade.
you need a lot of logistics
for an armored force that goes 20km.
They've been there seven days.
They need
water, fuel, ammunition, supplies, parts.
So we'll see how long they're in there.
They have taken a lot of prisoners.
Estimates are over
a couple of hundred Russian prisoners
that have already been taken.
And there are some indications
of movement
of Russian reinforces
reinforcements into the area
to counter it.
there's no proof of that just yet.
The fighting has not been intense,
other than beyond the border,
the border guards and the forces
that were in the area.
So this is Ukraine
saying we can do the same thing
the other thing that I'd point out,
Wolf, is indications
are that it's Western style vehicles,
the ones that have been given to Ukraine
that are conducting most of this attack.
And one of the things
that I find most fascinating
is having been a Stryker
brigade commander,
it appears that strikers in the air
are in the areas.
They move fast.
They're very mobile, they're very quiet.
And there are exactly fitted
for this kind of operation.
That would be a quick strike
inside of a country.
And then to pull back very quickly
without the need for a lot of logistics.
It's potentially a very,
very dangerous situation
unfolding between Ukraine and Russia
as well.
General Hertling, Aaron
David Miller, to both of you.
Thank you very much for your analysis.